Next step we have another array method.
We've actually seen before but when we saw it earlier it didn't really behave the way we wanted it to.
So the method is sought here.
I have an array called prices and it's full of numbers representing prices on a website or who knows
what.
When we called a red dot sought or prices dot sought early on when we talked about array methods back
when we were covering index of or reverse those sort of methods we didn't know about callbacks.
We didn't know about functions.
Even so when we call prices that sort the default sort in JavaScript it's very weird.
I have no idea why this decision was made but the default.
As we've already seen is to convert all of these numbers to strings and sort them as strings and that
leads to some very odd behavior.
If I run this code.
Price is not sort.
Just do it over here.
You can see it ends up sorting them by the first character.
So one before three and it's sorting them based off of strings rather than sorting them by actual value.
So we end up with nine at the end of the array and that's ninety nine point ninety nine.
Okay well we end up with ninety nine point nine nine at the end when we have three thousand and ninety
five hundred and four hundred and five or four hundred point five.
Those should all be greater but this sort doesn't really work the way we want it to.
So back then I said once we talked about functions we'll see how to use sort and how to customize its
behavior.
This is how we do it.
We pass in what they call on the docks a compare function.
Now this function has two parameters.
You can call them A and B or first and second and we need to return a value a number from compare func
if that compare func returns a negative number.
The function will sort a before B if it returns 0.
It does not change the order and if it returns a number greater than 0 it will sort be before a.
So this is always kind of confusing to explain when you look at it this way.
It may not make a lot of sense but let me show you how we would use it here.
So if we do is not sort and rewrite our function a compare function that needs to have two parameters
A and B is fine.
Then the standard sort would be a minus B and let me just show you what we get first.
I'll save this to a variable cost sort one.
Let's look at sort 1 we end up with twelve thirty five point nine nine ninety nine.
Four hundred three thousand and ninety five hundred.
We are sorting in ascending order from smallest to largest.
If we come back to this chart and remember that if the compare function returns a negative number it
sorts a before B where A is the first element B is the second if it's a positive number instead it sorts
b before a.
So if we walk through this with a simple example the first time this callback is executed we have four
hundred point five and three thousand.
So if we have a and b we have I'm just going to do 400 point five and then three thousand and the way
our compare function is setup is that it returns a minus B.
So 400 minus three thousand is going to be a negative number.
So what does it do with a negative number.
It sorts a before B.
So that means that it's going to sort 400 before three thousand.
Then let's say we were comparing thirty five point nine nine and twelve at that point a would be thirty
five point nine nine.
And then we have twelve point 0 4 B when we subtract a minus B thirty five minus twelve.
That gives us a positive number.
And when we have a positive number it sorts b before a.
So that means twelve would go before thirty five and if we had two numbers that were equal then they
would be treated as equal we wouldn't put one before the other we keep the order unchanged at least
between those two values.
So if we wanted to sort the other way let's call this concept ascending sort.
If I wanted to do a descending sort any ideas here we would do prices dot sort we have a and b let's
do instead of a and b this time X and Y and then we want to return Y minus X.
So this is the other way around.
And I kind of just made a horrible decision to name it X and Y from educational point of view because
now you can't compare these as easily.
So when you do that.
OK.
So a and b.
Same order here but now we're returning B minus a.
So if a is 1000 and we're comparing it to be which is 4000.
In this case we're doing B minus a.
So 4000 minus 1000 gives us a positive number.
And when we get a positive number sort b before a.
So that means moving the larger numbers to the left side of the array sorting them in descending order.
So this one change a minus B versus B minus a or first thing minus second thing versus second thing
minus first thing makes a significant difference.
So we look at descending sort it's going from ninety five hundred all the way down to twelve.
So the greatest number is first though the smallest number is last.
There is a problem though if we look at ascending sort it looks like I mean it is exactly the same thing
but that's deceiving.
Remember that sort is one of the few array methods at least one of the few a callback array methods
that actually mutates the original array.
So we sorted it one way in place.
We're actually updating prices and then we sorted it another way here in place.
So we lose this effort it's gone.
We're just making another reference to the same array.
So we have three variables pointing to the exact same array.
If we look at prices it's also updated.
It's just one array in memory.
So if I wanted to just have to clear different results where I was not sorting the same array I could
either declare two variables prices 1 and then make a duplicate of prices 2 with the same data or I
could use a method to copy the data into a new array.
So something like slice right here if I slice first and I don't pass anything in.
If I call prices not slice it makes a copy of that array.
We saw this behavior earlier when we first talked about slice.
So this is not something you would normally do unless you really did not want to sort in place.
It's pretty rare that you're going to sort ascending and descending at once.
Maybe you'll allow a user to toggle between them but then you can just have one array that is going
from ascending to descending.
But when I'm teaching I want to show you both so that you can take a look at both of them at the same
time.
Let's make another variable here called Bad sort equals prices.
Dot slice.
So I'm just making three copies each one of these variables now is not connected to the original prices.
They have the same data but they're not the same reference.
And let's see what we get.
So we have our bad sort.
First.
This is the one based off of strings I shouldn't call it bad sort but it's bad when you're sorting numbers.
Then we have our ascending sword where we go from smallest number to the greatest number that was using
a minus B first minus second and then we have our descending sword which goes the other way B minus
a.
So it returns a positive number.
When this version would've returned a negative number and vice versa.
So ninety five hundred down to twelve.
Okay.
Now the last thing I'll show you is how to sort something that is a little more complex rather than
a single array of numbers.
Let's go back to our books array okay.
I've copied the books array back in.
We have nine books.
They each have a rating.
I think that's the logical thing to sort by.
So we'll write our sort and we'll do this one in place books dot sort.
I mean it always happens in place but we won't make a copy of the array.
We don't care about the original order let's just mutate this array.
So books that sort we pass in our callback.
I'll go with a and b again but this time we can't do something like a minus B because a and b are both
objects.
They're referring to one element in the array at a time.
That's one element that's another.
How can we compare or how can we run one object minus another object.
We can't.
So what we need to do is compare based off of reading which is easy enough.
It's just a dot rating minus B dot rating.
And let's take a look at books now before the first one was four point two five for good omens three
point eighty three for changing my mind.
If we look at books over here not books but books we end up with first lord of the Flies.
Three point six seven.
Then we have changing my mind three point eight American Gods four point one one all the way down to
the way of kings.
Four point six five.
And we could reverse it if we wanted to by going the other direction if we wanted highest rated first
we would do beat out rating minus a dot rating.
Now you can do more complex sorts instead of just comparing based off of one value.
Here we're only sorting based off a rating.
You could write a more complex function that sorted based off of rating and also sorted based off of.
I don't know the genre or if you had different types of ratings like for audiobooks you have ratings
for the book itself in the story and then ratings for the performance quality of the person narrating
it.
So you have two different ratings and if you wanted to sort descending based off of primarily the story
but then secondarily also the performance you could write a more complex function.
But this is good enough for now.
Let's look at books now and what do we have up first may expand this.
We've got WAY OF KINGS four point six five and that is sort.
So we saw the very very basics of sort back when we covered arrays and array methods before we talked
about callbacks.
And it wasn't that useful.
I guess if you need to sort strings it's it's fine but if you need to sort numbers you need to pass
a callback in a compare func and it needs to return a number if it's a negative number one thing happens
if it's a positive number.
Something else happens.
Okay so that is sort.